Question: What is Node.js?
Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform JavaScript runtime environment that allows you to run JavaScript code outside the browser, mainly on the server-side. 
It is built on the Chrome V8 engine and uses an event-driven, non-blocking I/O model to build fast, scalable, and efficient applications.

Key Points to Mention in Interviews:
Runs server-side JavaScript
Non-blocking, asynchronous I/O → handles multiple requests efficiently
Single-threaded but can handle concurrency using the event loop
Uses V8 engine (same as Chrome browser)
Supports NPM (Node Package Manager) for modules and packages



Question: What are the features of Node.js?
Node.js has several important features that make it suitable for building fast, scalable, and efficient server-side applications.

1️⃣ Asynchronous and Event-Driven
All APIs in Node.js are asynchronous (non-blocking).
Server does not wait for tasks to complete; uses callbacks/events.

2️⃣ Single-Threaded but Highly Scalable
Node.js uses a single-threaded event loop for concurrency.
Can handle thousands of requests without creating new threads.

3️⃣ Non-Blocking I/O
Operations like file reading, network requests, DB queries are non-blocking, improving performance.

4️⃣ Fast Execution
Built on Chrome V8 engine, which compiles JS to machine code, making Node.js extremely fast.

5️⃣ Cross-Platform
Runs on Windows, Linux, macOS without changes to the code.

6️⃣ NPM (Node Package Manager)
Provides access to thousands of modules and packages.
Helps in package management and code reusability.
npm install express

7️⃣ Open Source
Free to use and has a large community support.

8️⃣ Real-Time Applications
Perfect for apps like chat applications, gaming, live streaming.
Uses WebSockets for real-time bidirectional communication.

9️⃣ Single Language for Frontend & Backend
You can write JavaScript on both client and server, improving development efficiency.

One-Minute Interview Answer ⭐
Node.js is asynchronous, event-driven, single-threaded, and non-blocking. It’s fast (V8 engine), cross-platform, open-source, and has NPM for package management. 
It’s ideal for real-time, scalable applications.


3️⃣ Features of Node.js
Asynchronous & Event-driven: Handles multiple requests without blocking
Single-threaded but scalable: Uses event loop
Non-blocking I/O: Fast file/network operations
Cross-platform: Works on Windows, Linux, MacOS
NPM: Rich package ecosystem


Question: What are Modules in Node.js?
A module in Node.js is a reusable block of code whose scope is private. Modules help organize code and separate functionality into smaller files. 
Node.js has a built-in module system, and modules can also be third-party or user-defined.



3️⃣ Module Systems in Node.js
1. CommonJS
Default module system in Node.js
Uses require() and module.exports

2. ES6 Modules
Uses import and export syntax
Supported in modern Node.js (with "type": "module" in package.json)

// CommonJS
const fs = require('fs');

// ES6
import fs from 'fs';


What is NPM?
NPM (Node Package Manager) is the default package manager for Node.js used to install, manage, share, and update JavaScript packages (libraries).

One-line interview answer ⭐
NPM is a tool that manages Node.js packages and project dependencies.


Why is NPM Important?
Reuse existing code instead of writing everything from scratch
Manage project dependencies easily
Version control of packages
Access to millions of open-source libraries


scripts → custom commands


Common NPM Commands (Most Asked)
Initialize Project
npm init
npm init -y

Install Packages
npm install express
npm i express

Install as Dev Dependency
npm install nodemon --save-dev

Install All Dependencies
npm install

Uninstall Package
npm uninstall express

Update Package
npm update express

Run Scripts
npm run start
npm run dev


What is package.json?
package.json is the configuration and metadata file of a Node.js project.
It describes project information, scripts, and dependencies required to run the application.

One-line interview answer ⭐
package.json manages project metadata, scripts, and dependencies in a Node.js application.


What are Dependencies?
Dependencies are external libraries/packages required for your project to work.


❓ What happens if node_modules is deleted?
Run npm install to regenerate it using package.json and package-lock.json.

❓ Why not push node_modules to GitHub?
It’s large and can be recreated using package.json.


process.env → environment variables
